---
name: Luca Faretra
order: 25
pic: 7
position: PhD Student
group: current
---
**Master Thesis abstract**: Alternative Splicing (AS) is an important step during maturation of primary transcripts as it allows to have different mRNA molecules from the same gene. These molecules code for different proteins that can have similar functions, but can also assume completely different functions. Based on this, to make a more accurate cell expression analysis, alternative splicing must be considered. Currently, there is a huge amount of tools that can analyze alternative splicing starting from RNA-Seq data and new tools are also constantly developed, but at the same time there is a lack of studies in which these tools are evaluated together, making it very difficult to choose the appropriate tool. In literature, AS tools are generally analyzed only with one RNA-Seq example, without considering that results may change depending on differing sequencing parameters, such as sequencing errors, read length, library size, etc. This is a limitation because various conditions may affect tool performance. In this thesis we developed a pipeline that permits to have near real RNA-Seq data with controlled parameters and we used it to test some event-based AS tools in order to observe how these affect performances. Essentially, our purpose is to contribute to enhancing the understanding and selection of AS tools for future RNA-Seq analyses. The findings highlight that various parameters may impact on the performance of event-based AS tools. The impact of these parameters varies depending on both the type of tool employed and the specific type of splicing event under analysis. Notably is the effect of fragment length on SUPPA's and rMATS's performance. While SUPPA outperforms rMATS for each type of event with short fragments, it exhibits a noticeable performance decline with longer fragments, rendering it inferior to rMATS in such instances. This decrease, however, is noticeable only in specific splicing events, particularly in ES, where SUPPA goes from an F-Score 17.20\% higher than that of rMATS (0.69 ± 0.007 vs. 0.59 ± 0.01) to a value 8.96\% lower (0.55 ± 0.01 vs. 0.61 ± 0.006). This emphasizes the criticality of selecting the appropriate tool based on the specific characteristics of starting data and the objectives of AS analysis.
